Agent quickstart part 2 (#10304)
dagger/dagger: docs/current_docs/quickstart/agent/part2.mdx

---
slug: /quickstart/agent-part-2
---
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import PartialIde from '../../partials/_ide.mdx';

# Build an AI Agent: Part 2

Now that you've learned the basics of creating an AI Agent with Dagger in [Part 1](./agent), its time to apply those lessons to a more realistic use case. In this guide, you will build an AI Agent that builds features for an existing project.

For this guide you will start with a Daggerized project. The agent will use the Dagger functions in this project that are already used locally and in CI for testing the project.

## Requirements

- You have [installed](TODO) Dagger
- You have [configured](TODO) an LLM provider to use with Dagger
- You have completed the first [AI Agent quickstart](./agent)

## Initialize the example application

> FIXME create and clone a repo from the [template repository](TODO)

Reviewer: If possible, could we consider other options here? Apart from the current approach, there are two others:

Add to assumptions "You have completed the CI quickstart"
- - Introduces the user to the CI use case
- - Reinforces the learning from Part 1 (still creating modules and functions but with a different purpose)
- - Perhaps more realistic, a new user wouldn't typically start with a Daggerized project already

In this case the user still already has the hello-dagger app and pipeline when starting part 2.

Add the test function from the CI quickstart directly to the workspace module
- - Simplifies (workspace + agent instead of workspace + agent + pipeline)
- - Increases the value and utility of the workspace module (makes it do more than just read/write/list)

In this case the user clones the existing hello-dagger app (without pipeline) at the start of part 2 and adds the test function to the workspace as part of the "create workspace" step.

Reviewer: I like a combo of 3 and 2 - agent-generated app + workspace with test function

Author: The reason for using a template repository is that in part 3 the user will create a github action for the app. They can't do this with a cloned repo. The options are:
- Fork the repo and make sure to change the PR base when opening a PR
- Use a template repo

We can update the CI quickstart to use this template as well if we want to add new steps to that for CI in github actions. In that case the template would just be `hello-dagger` and in this guide the user would either complete the CI quickstart or skip ahead by copying in the completed CI module.

For the test function: the entire proposed value here is that the agent can benefit from your daggerized project. If you have to duplicate the code in 2 modules, that defeats the purpose. Ideally the workspace doesn't need to exist as a submodule, but that's not possible yet.

Reviewer: > Use a template repo

This is a good idea, assuming we want to use the same hello-dagger project. But see my option 3, where we have the agent build a skeleton app in part 1 and then continue using that same skeleton in part 2. We wouldn't need a template repo (hello-dagger or any other) in this case, and I think that flow is also slightly better since part 2 builds on the output of part 1.

> For the test function: the entire proposed value here is that the agent can benefit from your daggerized project. 

Yes, makes sense but my worry here is that we're assuming the user has a project that's already daggerized. In this quickstart, we are providing a daggerized project - but I'm guessing that most users will actually be working with non-daggerized project. 

So I'm suggesting that we could instead (a) have the user complete the CI quickstart or (b) if that's adding too much friction, add only a test function to the workspace for the agent to use instead of providing a daggerized project.

> If you have to duplicate the code in 2 modules, that defeats the purpose

100% agree! My suggestion was different - assuming we started with a non-daggerized version of the project, then as mentioned above, the test function could be added to the workspace module. No duplication here, since there would not be any other module.

Author: I agree the flow from "part 1" to "part 2" is a bit disjointed because while we're building on the concepts we're starting with a different codebase. I don't see a way around this because part 1 is meant to be as simple as possible and should therefore be a standalone agent. This intends to show a more realistic use case of adding an agent to your project, so it needs to start from that project IMO.

And they don't necessarily need that project to be already daggerized, but they'll probably add dagger functions that will be used by both developers and the agent (and maybe CI too). Putting the test function in the workspace would mean it's only usable by the agent

Reviewer: > I agree the flow from "part 1" to "part 2" is a bit disjointed because while we're building on the concepts we're starting with a different codebase. I don't see a way around this because part 1 is meant to be as simple as possible and should therefore be a standalone agent. This intends to show a more realistic use case of adding an agent to your project, so it needs to start from that project IMO.

I see. Then my understanding of the overall flow is different. I thought the idea was to build an agent which creates a codebase and then continue iterating on that same agent in the context of the same codebase (not a different one). 

> And they don't necessarily need that project to be already daggerized, but they'll probably add dagger functions that will be used by both developers and the agent (and maybe CI too). Putting the test function in the workspace would mean it's only usable by the agent.

Not necessarily, because I think the test function would still be usable from the workspace module? So instead of `dagger call test`, sth like `dagger -m workspace call test` could work?

Reviewer: We discussed sync, decision is to make this (parts 2 and 3) a separate quickstart, decision on where to place it TBD. One option is to have it as a separate item in the menu after the CI/AI quickstarts, as it is a mix of both scenarios.

---
slug: /quickstart/agent-part-2
---
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import PartialIde from '../../partials/_ide.mdx';

> # Build a Contextual Agent

Author: I like "Add an AI Agent to an Existing Project" but I feel like it might be too long. We can try it out!

Now that you've learned the basics of creating an AI Agent with Dagger in [Built an AI Agent](./agent), its time to apply those lessons to a more realistic use case. In this guide, you will build an AI Agent that builds features for an existing project.

For this guide you will start with a Daggerized project. The agent will use the Dagger functions in this project that are already used locally and in CI for testing the project.

## Requirements

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

This quickstart will take you approximately 10 minutes to complete. You should ideally have completed the AI agent and CI quickstart and should be familiar with programming in Go, Python, TypeScript, PHP, or Java.

Before beginning, ensure that:
```

- you have [installed the Dagger CLI](../../install.mdx).
- You have [configured](../../configuration/llm.mdx) an LLM provider to use with Dagger
- You have completed the [AI Agent quickstart](./agent) to learn the basics of LLMs in Dagger
- You have completed the [CI quickstart](./ci) to a Daggerize a project

> ## Open the example application

Author: How come? What I'm trying to say is more like "open the project in your terminal+editor". Maybe there's a better verb for that

        ```

        Now replace the main file in the workspace with the following content.
        Edit `.dagger/workspace/src/main/java/io/dagger/modules/workspace/Workspace.java`:
        ```java file=./snippets/part2/workspace/java/src/main/java/io/dagger/modules/workspace/Workspace.java
        ```
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="php" label="PHP">
        Start by creating the submodule:

        ```shell
        dagger init --sdk php .dagger/workspace
        ```

        Now replace the main file in the workspace with the following content.
        Edit `.dagger/workspace/src/Workspace.php`:
        ```php file=./snippets/part2/workspace/php/src/Workspace.php
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

See the functions of the new workspace module:

```shell
dagger -m .dagger/workspace functions
```

Now install the new submodule as a dependency to the main module:

```shell
dagger install ./.dagger/workspace
```

## Create an Agentic function

This agent will be used to make changes to the application and use the existing `Test` function to validate the changes.

<Tabs groupId="language" queryString="sdk">
    <TabItem value="go" label="Go">

>         Add the following new function to the main dagger module in `.dagger/main.go`:

Author: We should definitely discuss this more because I think showing the whole file is confusing. Will start a thread in discord and summarize here after

    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

This new function `Develop` is the new agent. Because you installed the `Workspace` submodule, `Env` has generated functions for `WithWorkspaceInput` and `WithWorkspaceOutput`. Using these, you've created an environment with a `Workspace` input and output.

The `Env` in this agent is privileged, which means the environment will also include the current module and core Dagger APIs. This allows the agent to use the existing `Test` function.

Notice the LLM references a prompt file instead of an inline prompt. The final step is to add this prompt file. Create a file `.dagger/develop_prompt.md` with the following content:

```
You are a developer on the HelloDagger Vue.js project.
You will be given an assignment and the tools to complete the assignment.
Your assignment is: $assignment

## Constraints
- Before writing code, analyze the Workspace to understand the project.
- Do not make unneccessary changes.
- Run tests with the HelloDagger Test tool.
- You must pass the Directory from the Workspace_get_source to the Test tool.
- Always run tests to validate your code changes.
- Do not stop until you have completed the assignment and the tests pass.
```

> This prompt is longer and more structured than the prompt from the first quickstart. The tasks the agent will be asked to complete will be more complex because its making modifications to an existing codebase and will need to understand more context. To create a reliable agent that can operate with more complexity, the prompt structure and tools are extremely important.

Reviewer: My gut check is to use this type of callout when there's a deviation from a pattern the user was taught earlier, or a longer-term general learning/concept that the user should remember even after the current document is completed.

## Run the agent

> Now its time to run the new agent. Enter Dagger shell by running `dagger`, and then:

Author: For me this goes back to a point @levlaz raised about being overly "markety" in docs. As in, I personally don't think we need to "sell" shell every time we ask a user to use it. Since it's a guide, they should just do it and experience it for themselves

> Now its time to run the new agent. Enter Dagger shell by running `dagger`, and then:

Reviewer: Fair point. I took this as is from the other quickstart but we could simply shorten it to "Type `dagger` to launch Dagger Shell in interactive mode." Updated the suggestion.

```shell
develop "make the main page green"
```

If all goes well, the agent will explore the project to find the correct place to make the changes, write the appropriate changes, and then validate them by calling the `Test` function.

If the agent misbehaves, try providing more guidance in the prompt file based on what went wrong.

TODO gif of output

Since the agent returns a `Directory`, we can use Dagger shell to do more things with that `Directory`. First, save the output to a variable:

```shell
completed=$(develop "make the main page green")
```

With that completed assignment in a variable, you can use it just like any other Dagger object in shell:

```shell
# Get a terminal in the build container with the directory
build-env --source $completed | terminal
# Run the app with the updated source code
build --source $completed | as-service | up --ports 8080:80
# Save the changes to your filesystem
$completed | export .
```

> ## Next steps

Author: Correct, I'll write that part once we get this approved and merged

There are a few important points to note here:
- The variable `environment` is the environment to define inputs and outputs for the agent. Each input and output provides a description which acts as a declarative form of prompting.
- Other Dagger module dependencies are automatically detected and made available for use in this environment. In this example, Dagger finds the `workspace` sub-module installed and automatically generates bindings for it: `with-workspace-input` and `with-workspace-output`. These bindings can be used to provide (or retrieve) the workspace to the agent.
- The `environment` is privileged, which means that the environment includes all the Dagger Functions in the existing Daggerized CI pipeline, plus the core Dagger API. This allows the agent to use the existing `test` function to run unit tests.
- The LLM is supplied with a prompt file instead of an inline prompt. By separating the prompt from the Dagger Function code, it becomes easier to maintain and update the instructions given to the LLM.

> - The `Env` in this agent is privileged, which means the environment will also include the current module and core Dagger APIs. This allows the agent to use the existing `test` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Ah I missed that you included that in the other bullets 👍

---

> slug: /quickstart/agent-in-project

Reviewer: Guessing  the filename needs to change to match?

```shell
llm | model
```

This should show the model you've configured to use with your provider.

Call the agent with an assignment:

```shell
develop "make the main page green"
```

If all goes well, the agent will explore the project to find the correct place to make the changes, write the appropriate changes, and then validate them by calling the `test` function.

:::tip
If the agent misbehaves, try providing more guidance in the prompt file based on what went wrong.
:::

<VideoPlayer src="/img/current_docs/quickstart/agent/develop.webm" alt="Run the agent" />

Since the agent returns a `Directory`, use Dagger Shell to do more with that `Directory`. For example:

```shell
# Save the directory containing the completed assignment to a variable
completed=$(develop "make the main page green")
# Get a terminal in the build container with the directory
build-env --source $completed | terminal
# Run the app with the updated source code
build --source $completed | as-service | up --ports 8080:80
# Save the changes to your filesystem
$completed | export .
```

Now you have built an agent that can write code for your project!

## Deploy the agent to GitHub

> The next step is to take this agent and deploy it so that it can run automatically. For this part of the guide, you will configure Github so that when you label a Github issue with "develop", the agent will automatically pick up the task and open a pull request with its solution.

Reviewer: General note: GitHub instead of Github

> The next step is to take this agent and deploy it so that it can run automatically. For this part of the guide, you will configure Github so that when you label a Github issue with "develop", the agent will automatically pick up the task and open a pull request with its solution.

Author: I'll update Github to GitHub. The other suggestion actually says something different from what the guide shows them
- The user opens an issue
- Then the user labels the issue with "develop"

> The next step is to take this agent and deploy it so that it can run automatically. For this part of the guide, you will configure Github so that when you label a Github issue with "develop", the agent will automatically pick up the task and open a pull request with its solution.

Reviewer: Ah, good point, I missed that. Updated my suggestion.

> The following steps require that you used the Github template and have your own hello-dagger repository.

Reviewer: Yes, I think it's a fair assumption. I'm even in favour of stressing it at the beginning of the guide - "you will need this template repository to complete the entire quickstart" or similar. My only note was that having it at this specific point in the guide is confusing because it made me (at least) think "wait a min, is this something extra I need to be doing before going to the next step - if yes, how"

    ```typescript file=./snippets/part3/agent/typescript/agent.ts.snippet
    ```
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="php" label="PHP">
    Add the following new function to the main dagger module in `.dagger/src/HelloDagger.php`:

    ```php file=./snippets/part3/agent/php/agent.php.snippet
    ```

    Be sure to add imports for the following:

    ```php
    use Dagger\Secret;
    ```
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="java" label="Java">
    Add the following new function to the main dagger module in `.dagger/src/main/java/io/dagger/modules/hellodagger/HelloDagger.java`:

    ```java file=./snippets/part3/agent/java/agent.java.snippet
    ```

    Be sure to add imports for the following:

    ```java
import io.dagger.client.Secret;
import io.dagger.client.GithubIssue;
    ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

The `develop-issue` function connects the dots in the automation flow. It will be called when a Github issue is ready to be developed. Using the `github-issue` dependency, this code will:

- Read the title and body from the Github issue
- Use the body as the assignment for the agent
- Open a pull request with the Directory returned by the agent

> ### Create a Github Actions workflow

Reviewer: I suggest making the steps in this sub-section a numbered list, as it will make it easier to read. I've added suggestions inline.

> Github Actions will need the ability to call out to an LLM. It will need the same environment variables you [configured](../../configuration/llm.mdx) locally setup as repository secrets.

Reviewer: Maybe before this, a step to create a GitHub access token? And then in this step, also "remember to add a secret named GH_TOKEN" because that's needed for the Action. 

Note: we don't need to describe it in detail, we can point to Github docs for the details. But we should specify the minimum permissions the token needs.

> Github Actions will need the ability to call out to an LLM. It will need the same environment variables you [configured](../../configuration/llm.mdx) locally setup as repository secrets.

Author: They don't need to create a token, it's created in the workflow by the permissions block

To configure new repository secrets:

> - From your Github repository, select the Settings tab

Author: Are code blocks really preferred for talking about elements on a webpage? Same question for the following suggestions. That surprises me!

> - From your Github repository, select the Settings tab

Reviewer: I'm with you on this, I would also prefer NOT to use code blocks for webpage elements. However this is the pattern used in [other](https://docs.dagger.io/configuration/cloud#public-traces) [docs](https://docs.dagger.io/configuration/cloud#create-a-dagger-cloud-organization) pages, so I suggested it for consistency. 

However it's also not a bad idea for you to continue with quotes here and use this as a forcing function for us to update other pages to this style (feel free to open an issue and assign to me).

- Under Security, expand the section "Secrets and Variables" and select Actions
- Select "New repository secret"

> - Create a secret for each variable required for your LLM provider. For example: `GEMINI_API_KEY`

Author: I used `GEMINI_API_KEY` because that's what is included in the workflow provided, but the user should know what we're referring to here since they have already set this in their local environment

![Configure Github Actions repository secrets](/img/current_docs/quickstart/agent/configure_gha_llm.png)

If you signed up for Dagger Cloud, you should also configure a `DAGGER_CLOUD_TOKEN` repository secret to see your Github Actions traces in Dagger Cloud.

To find your Dagger Cloud token, navigate to the organization settings page using the cogwheel icon in the top navigation bar. Under the `Tokens` sub-menu, click the eye icon to view the token. You can also use this URL pattern: `https://v3.dagger.cloud/{Your Org Name}/settings?tab=Tokens`

![Get token](/img/current_docs/configuration/get-token.png)

> 

Author: I copied this in from that page because it's too disruptive to link out to other pages if we're expecting them to follow a step there and then come back here for more steps

> 

Reviewer: I had the same thought process but then considered that we're doing the same already (linking out) for LLM configuration: https://docs.dagger.io/quickstart/agent#configure-the-llm-endpoint. So I think it's fine to do the same here too.

> 

Author: The difference for me is that they've gone through the LLM configuration at some point by following the guide, so they may not have to click through to that link. But they haven't needed to get a cloud token yet

> The repository also needs to be configured to give Github Actions the ability to create pull requests. On the left side, select Actions -> General and find the option "Allow GitHub Actions to create and approve pull requests". Make sure this is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. GitHub Actions also needs the ability to create pull requests. On the left side, select `Actions` -> `General` and find the option `Allow GitHub Actions to create and approve pull requests`. Make sure this is enabled.
```

![Allow Github Actions to create pull requests](/img/current_docs/quickstart/agent/configure_gha_prs.png)

> Create the file `.github/workflows/develop.yml` with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create the file `.github/workflows/develop.yml` with the following content:
```

```yaml file=./snippets/part3/develop.yml
```

This snippet shows an example with Google Gemini by specifying `GEMINI_API_KEY`. Change this to match the repository secrets you created earlier.

> This Github Actions workflow will call the `develop-issue` function when the label "develop" is added to an issue. The Github token passed to the agent has permissions to read issues, write contents, and write pull-requests.

Reviewer: Missing the step to create the Github token? See previous note.

> This Github Actions workflow will call the `develop-issue` function when the label "develop" is added to an issue. The Github token passed to the agent has permissions to read issues, write contents, and write pull-requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This GitHub Actions workflow will call the `develop-issue` function when the label "develop" is added to an issue. The GitHub token passed to the agent has permissions to read issues, write contents, and create pull requests.
```

Author: The word "write" is used instead of "create" because the token permissions are either "read" or "write" and the token has "write" for pull requests

Reviewer: Ah OK, thanks for clarifying! Would it make sense to have those verbs in code font to make it clear they refer to actual permissions?

Commit and push your changes to Github:

```shell
git add .
git commit -m'deploy agent to github'
git push
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Run the agent in GitHub Actions

```

> Create a new Github issue in your repository. You can title it "change the page color" with the description "make the main page green".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new Github issue in your repository. Title it "change the page color" with the description "make the main page green".
```

Maybe this should be a different color, to distinguish it from the previous run?

Author: Sure, changing the previous run so that I don't need to take new screenshots

![Create a Github issue](/img/current_docs/quickstart/agent/create_issue.png)

Now add the label called "develop" by typing "develop" in the labels input field.

![Add issue label develop](/img/current_docs/quickstart/agent/add_label.png)

> When the label is added, the Github Actions workflow will get kicked off. You can see it running by clicking on the "Actions" tab or by opening Dagger Cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the label is added, it triggers the GitHub Actions workflow. See the workflow by clicking the `Actions` tab or by opening Dagger Cloud (if you configured it).
```

![Watch in actions tab](/img/current_docs/quickstart/agent/watch_actions.png)

Once the workflow completes, there will be a new pull request ready to review!

![See the agents PR](/img/current_docs/quickstart/agent/agent_pr.png)

## Next steps

> Congratulations! You've created your agentic fuction with a Daggerized project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congratulations! You created an agentic function with a Daggerized project and successfully ran it, both locally and in CI.
```
